---
title: "Study Guide - Week 0"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - study-guides
tags:
  - week-0
---

>"You've been here before"  
> \- Stephen King, "Needful Things"

<!--more-->

# Welcome friend

This is an on-going series meant to be an accompanying guide throughout your journey in _this module_.

**Disclaimer: this is not an official resource!**

# Introduction

This module requires you to make up for any shortages in knowledge and experience in an extremely short period of time.
It has also seen a huge revamp in coursework over the summer.
Major changes include a whole new individual project and framework for the team project.
Discard any stories you've heard from your friends who has taken this module before.   

Engage with your prof/tutors and course mates.
Clarify your doubts on the official forum.

> 聞くは一時の恥、聞かぬは一生の恥
> 
> "Asking is but a moment of shame, not knowing is a lifetime of shame" - Japanese proverb 

This module has a radically different classroom structure in which most of the work is done _outside_ of lectures and tutorials.
You are expected to do all the tutorials and be confident enough to not only present, but to teach the material.
Teaching requires a deeper level of understanding so it's a better gauge of what you _don't_ know. 
Since tutorial time is _really_ short, be on time and be ready to go. 

Obviously, this means that you are required to do all of your work beforehand. 
This module has been taught for a very long time and I can assure you that every exercise is there because it is important.
Do all of them and keep the answers somewhere.
You will be needing them for finals and none will be provided.

You are strongly recommended to read through the whole textbook once while you still can. 
Don't worry about memorizing every single piece of information, you just need to get a rough feel of what's in there.
Again, this is because the module covers a lot of ground.
For example, not knowing more advanced OOP concepts will result in you writing nigh untestable code since the chapters on OOP concepts and testing do not appear until fairly late.

For ~~grade-oriented~~ students, **READ THE GRADING SCHEME**.
**NO REALLY, I CANNOT STRESS THIS ENOUGH. READ. THE. GRADING. SCHEME.** 
Understand early that this module is not just about coding skills. 
Documentation, tests and an eye for detail will make or break your project and in turn, your grade.
The implications of a lack of bell curve for the project portion of the module should be evident.

# Study guide structure

Each study guide will have a predictable structure.

## Introduction

Front-matter, usually comments about the pacing for the week and weeks ahead.

## Task breakdown

We will cover each task in greater detail, potential pitfalls will be highlighted.

## Extra material

Content in this section are meant to compliment your understanding of the coursework in the official textbook.
In here you will find concrete code examples to demonstrate concepts. 
 
Remember that all code examples can be run in `jshell`.
Fire up `jshell` and simply copy and paste everything in there.
A sample session might look something like this:

```
$ jshell
|  Welcome to JShell -- Version 11.0.4
|  For an introduction type: /help intro

jshell> class ImmutableProperty<T> {

...>     T a, b;
...>     public ImmutableProperty(T a, T b) {
...>         this.a = a;
...>         this.b = b;
...>     }
...>     
...>     public ImmutableProperty<T> withA(T newA) {
...>         return new ImmutableProperty<T>(newA, b);
...>     }
...>     
...>     public ImmutableProperty<T> withB(T newB) {
...>             return new ImmutableProperty<T>(a, newB);
...>     }
...> 
...>     public T getA() { return a; }
...>     public T getB() { return b; }
...>     
...> }
|  created class ImmutableProperty
jshell> var notNice = new ImmutableProperty<Integer>(0, 0);
notNice ==> ImmutableProperty@36d4b5c

jshell> var veryNice = notNice.withA(420).withB(69);
veryNice ==> ImmutableProperty@51efea79

jshell> veryNice.getA();
$4 ==> 420

jshell> veryNice.getB();
$5 ==> 69
```

A helpful [tutorial](http://cr.openjdk.java.net/~rfield/tutorial/JShellTutorial.html) for JShell is available.
 