---
title: "Study Guide - Week 4"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - study-guides
tags:
  - week-4
toc: true
toc_label: "Table of Contents"
toc_icon: "accessible-icon"
---

Oh dear are you ever going to need this. 
Week 4 is going to be hard.
<!--more-->

# UML 
It's time to learn how to draw UML diagrams. 
Go to the repo for AddressBook-3 and read the tutorial on PlantUML. 
Grade-oriented students should definitely take note of this.
\*wink wink*

# JavaFX
Now that you can finally be graded for implementing UI features, there's some hope that we can reduce the number of AddressBook lookalikes. 

## Scene Builder
In the tutorial, we brush aside creation of the `fxml` file quite a bit. 
This is because as of writing, Scene Builder support broke in IntelliJ and the issue doesn't seem to get enough attention from Jetbrains.
Also, for some reason that I have yet to get around to figuring out(instead I'm writing this), `MainWindow.fxml` doesn't seem to render properly in Scene Builder.

Since writing compliant `fxml` is apparently a lost art, the trick is to write small components using the `fx:root` construct and place them in `MainWindow`.

## `fx:root`  
It is mentioned in the tutorial that we use the `fx:root` construct when we want to create reusable components. 
To understand what it is, we first have to understand that problem it is trying to solve.

Let's say you create a custom component that is composed of other components.
Naturally, those components are a child of a single _root node_.
If you use an `FXMLLoader` to load it, you have to cast the result of `FXMLLoader#load()` to the type of the root node.
For example, the `MainWindow` fxml file in the tutorial should be casted to an `AnchorPane`. 
Unfortunately, this means that you cannot extend the behaviour of your custom component without another layer of abstraction.
If we wanted to add custom behaviour to the `MainWindow` class, we will have to extend the `AnchorPane` class and load the `fxml` file in our new class.

Take a step back and realise what we have wrought.
1. Created a fxml file with an `AnchorPane` as the root node.
1. Created a new class that extends `AnchorPane` to load an `AnchorPane`. 
1. End up with an `AnchorPane` inside of an `AnchorPane`.  


Obviously, this is less than ideal.
The `fx:root` construct solves this problem in an idiomatic way.

1. Create a `fxml` file with a root node using the `fx:root` construct.
1. Create a class that extends said root node.
1. JavaFX does some magic behind the scenes to populate your class with the contents of the `fxml` file.

This way, you don't end up with a superfluous container.

## Launchers, modules and build tools
A brief timeline :

Java Version | Events
---|---
8 (LTS) | People were more or less happy
9 | Module system introduced, breaking changes to how Java projects import dependencies
11 (LTS) | Oracle removed JavaFX from the JDK ← We're here

Migrating from 8 to 11, you suffer through 2 breaking changes.
Early on in the migration process, a decision was made to not make use of the module system.
As a result, some really weird classpath issues occurs which can be bypassed by using an entry point to launch a JavaFX application.
Is the overhead of a barebones launcher class worth the effort of not maintaining a `module-info.java`? 
That's up for discussion. 
 

